django-sequences
################

The problem
===========

By default, Django gives each model an auto-incrementing integer primary key.
These primary keys look like they generate a continuous sequence of integers.

However, this behavior isn't guaranteed.

If a transaction inserts a row and then is rolled back, the sequence counter
isn't rolled back for performance reasons, creating a gap in primary keys.

This can cause compliance issues for some use cases such as accounting.

This risk isn't well known. Since most transactions succeed, values look
sequential. Gaps will only be revealed by audits.

The solution
============

django-sequences provides a ``get_next_value`` function which is designed to
be used as follows:

.. code:: python

    from django.db import transaction
    from sequences import get_next_value
    from invoices.models import Invoice

    with transaction.atomic():
        Invoice.objects.create(number=get_next_value("invoice_numbers"))

Or, if you'd rather use an object-oriented API:

.. code:: python

    from django.db import transaction
    from sequences import Sequence
    from invoices.models import Invoice

    invoice_numbers = Sequence("invoice_numbers")

    with transaction.atomic():
        Invoice.objects.create(number=invoice_numbers.get_next_value())

``get_next_value`` relies on the database's transactional integrity to ensure
that each value is returned exactly once. As a consequence, **the guarantees
of django-sequences apply only if you call** ``get_next_value`` **and save its
return value to the database within the same transaction!**

Getting started
===============

django-sequences is compatible with Django 2.2 (LTS) and 3.0.

It is released under the BSD license, like Django itself.

Install django-sequences:

.. code:: shell-session

    $ pip install django-sequences

Add it to the list of applications in your project's settings:

.. code:: python

    INSTALLED_APPS += ['sequences.apps.SequencesConfig']

Run migrations:

.. code:: shell-session

    $ django-admin migrate

API
===

``get_next_value``
------------------

.. code:: pycon

    >>> from sequences import get_next_value

This function generates a gapless sequence of integer values:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_next_value()
    1
    >>> get_next_value()
    2
    >>> get_next_value()
    3

It supports multiple independent sequences:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_next_value("cases")
    1
    >>> get_next_value("cases")
    2
    >>> get_next_value("invoices")
    1
    >>> get_next_value("invoices")
    2

The first value defaults to 1. It can be customized:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_next_value("customers", initial_value=1000)  # pro growth hacking

The ``initial_value`` parameter only matters when ``get_next_value`` is called
for the first time for a given sequence — assuming the corresponding database
transaction gets committed; as discussed above, if the transaction is rolled
back, the generated value isn't consumed. It's also possible to initialize a
sequence in a data migration and not use ``initial_value`` in actual code.

Sequences can loop:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_next_value("seconds", initial_value=0, reset_value=60)

When the sequence reaches ``reset_value``, it restarts at ``initial_value``.
In other works, it generates ``reset_value - 2``, ``reset_value - 1``,
``initial_value``, ``initial_value + 1``, etc. In that case, each call to
``get_next_value`` must provide ``initial_value`` when it isn't the default
and ``reset_value``.

**Database transactions that call** ``get_next_value`` **for a given sequence
are serialized.** In other words, when you call ``get_next_value`` in a
database transaction, other callers trying to get a value from the same
sequence block until the transaction completes, either with a commit or a
rollback. You should keep such transactions short to minimize the impact on
performance.

This is why databases default to a faster behavior that may create gaps.

Passing ``nowait=True`` makes ``get_next_value`` raise an exception instead of
blocking in this scenario. This is rarely useful. Also it doesn't work for the
first call. (Arguably this is a bug. Patches welcome.)

Calls to ``get_next_value`` for distinct sequences don't interact with one
another.

Finally, passing ``using="..."`` allows selecting the database on which the
current sequence value is stored. When this parameter isn't provided, it
defaults to the default database for writing models of the ``sequences``
application. See `Multiple databases`_ for details.

To sum up, the complete signature of ``get_next_value`` is:

.. code:: python

    get_next_value(
        sequence_name="default",
        initial_value=1,
        reset_value=None,
        *,
        nowait=False,
        using=None,
    )

``get_last_value``
------------------

.. code:: pycon

    >>> from sequences import get_last_value

This function returns the last value generated by a sequence:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_last_value()
    None
    >>> get_next_value()
    1
    >>> get_last_value()
    1
    >>> get_next_value()
    2
    >>> get_last_value()
    2

If the sequence hasn't generated a value yet, ``get_last_value`` returns
``None``.

It supports independent sequences like ``get_next_value``:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> get_next_value("cases")
    1
    >>> get_last_value("cases")
    1
    >>> get_next_value("invoices")
    1
    >>> get_last_value("invoices")
    1

It accepts ``using="..."`` for selecting the database on which the current
sequence value is stored, defaulting to the default database for reading
models of the ``sequences`` application.

The complete signature of ``get_last_value`` is:

.. code:: python

    get_last_value(
        sequence_name="default",
        *,
        using=None,
    )

``get_last_value`` **is a convenient and fast way to tell how many values a
sequence generated but it makes no guarantees.** Concurrent calls to
``get_next_value`` may produce unexpected results of ``get_last_value``.

``Sequence``
------------

.. code:: pycon

    >>> from sequences import Sequence

(not to be confused with ``sequences.models.Sequence``, a private API)

This class stores parameters for a sequence and provides ``get_next_value``
and ``get_last_value`` methods:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> claim_ids = Sequence("claims")
    >>> claim_ids.get_next_value()
    1
    >>> claim_ids.get_next_value()
    2
    >>> claim_ids.get_last_value()
    2

This reduces the risk of errors when the same sequence is used in multiple
places.

Instances of ``Sequence`` are also infinite iterators:

.. code:: pycon

    >>> next(claim_ids)
    3
    >>> next(claim_ids)
    4

The complete API is:

.. code:: python

    Sequence(
        sequence_name="default",
        initial_value=1,
        reset_value=None,
        *,
        using=None,
    )

    Sequence.get_next_value(
        self,
        *,
        nowait=False
    )

    Sequence.get_last_value(
        self,
    )

All parameters have the same meaning as in the ``get_next_value`` and
``get_last_value`` functions.


Contributing
============

You can run tests with:

.. code:: shell-session

    $ poetry install
    $ poetry shell
    $ make test

If you'd like to contribute, please open an issue or a pull request on GitHub!

Database support
================

django-sequences is tested on PostgreSQL, MySQL, Oracle, and SQLite.

MySQL only supports the ``nowait`` parameter when it's MariaDB ≥ 8.0.1.

Applications that will only ever be deployed with an SQLite database don't
need django-sequences because SQLite's ``INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT``
fields are guaranteed to be sequential.

Multiple databases
==================

Since django-sequences relies on the database to guarantee transactional
integrity, the current value for a given sequence must be stored in the same
database as models containing generated values.

In a project that uses multiple databases, you must write a suitable database
router to create tables for the ``sequences`` application on all databases
storing models containing sequential numbers.

Each database has its own namespace: a sequence with the same name stored in
two databases will have independent counters in each database.

Changelog
=========

2.5
---

* Fix Japanese and Turkish translations.
* Restore compatibility with Python 3.5.
* Support relabeling the ``sequences`` app with a custom ``AppConfig``.

2.4
---

* Add the ``get_last_value`` function.
* Add the ``Sequence`` class.

2.3
---

* Optimize performance on MySQL.
* Test on MySQL, SQLite and Oracle.

2.2
---

* Optimize performance on PostgreSQL ≥ 9.5.

2.1
---

* Provide looping sequences with ``reset_value``.

2.0
---

* Add support for multiple databases.
* Add translations.
* ``nowait`` becomes keyword-only argument.
* Drop support for Python 2.

1.0
---

* Initial stable release.
